It's just the best out of comparison to what happens to books called Milton Friedman's style.
Well, literary criticism.
Your Amazon ranking this morning is 44.
Oh, thank you.
That's pretty remarkable.
I mean, it is quite an observation, isn't it, that a work of literary criticism could resonate so much with the popular leadership?
Just because of Mr. Dillon.
Mr. Dillon, nevertheless.
You are giving us a close reading of the poetry, and I'd like to just start, because I am writing for civilians, as we say.
Please.
Perhaps you could just give me an idea of what you regard close reading.
What is close reading?
What is a close reader of poetry, or any text for that matter, when they say that?
I sometimes tell my students that it's easier to attend lectures than to attend to them.
So we always spend the first meeting after we go to it.
But my teaching here, we give lectures and we give sections, so the same people are then doing both.
I take it it's a certain kind of attention.
It's necessary for close reading, it's a certain kind of attention.
If it's not cared for, it will sacrifice.
some very, very important things, because I take it that there isn't any attention that you could ever give that would involve sacrifice.
So for me, one of the things I keep coming back to is the idea that to do this is not to do that, and that, as Eliot says, however rich drama is as a form, is as a form.
There are certain things drama gives up in order to be drama, and that's why you need Dante as well as Shakespeare and so on.
So I take it close reading is predicated on...
realization.
That is, that unless certain ideas and convictions and wisdom are realized in the very words, then all you're talking about is an abstraction or a sketch and so on.
So I take it the close reader's job is to help people notice things they otherwise wouldn't have noticed.
I take it that artists are people who are very good not only at noticing things but noticing relations between things that they've noticed.
And then the critic comes in as somebody who notices some things about that.
We talk about Dylan, of course, being a poet of performance, and there have been obviously parallels made between Shakespeare and Dylan, and you've even suggested them yourself.
Perhaps we could expand a little bit on that.
Shakespeare, in his lifetime, so far as we know, never attempted to publish his own plays.
He clearly wrote a performance.
And I'm wondering, can we make that parallel with Dylan?
Do you think it matters to him that people read his poetry as a text?
I think Dylan doesn't want people to read them as poems.
And in the book, I try to talk about the difference that it makes, not just that something is performance,
because song is a different performing art from drama, and there's a difference that it makes that song is what it is.
And I talk a little bit about different systems of punctuation, which sounds a very small thing, but T.S.
Eliot was right to say that the difference between poetry and prose is that they're different systems of punctuation.
They're not different media.
They're not different genre.
They have the same medium language.
They're not different genre, because you could have a comedy that's in poetry or a comedy that's in poetry.
They're different systems of punctuation.
And song is itself, then, another different system of punctuation because it has melisma, that there's no equivalent in poetry or prose to what it is to sing long to rain.
There's nothing you can do that's like to, ooh, re, eh.
That is to spend the one syllable.
So there's a root difference.
The Shakespeare question is, I think, tricky and complicated, partly because Dylan himself invoked Shakespeare.
Shakespeare, he's in the alley with his pointed shoes and his bells, talking to some French girl who says she knows me well.
So the feeling of kind of comic camaraderie, and Shakespeare, Ophelia turns up, as you know, in Destination Row.
I mean, he's very well read, it's well known, I mean, his own sort of joke.
It's now questioned by scholars as to whether there was the clear-cut distinction between the page and the stage that we've taken for granted with Shakespeare.
And there's a very good recent book that says that one of the reasons we have Shakespeare's plays in such different forms is that there was a move towards preserving them, not only a move by Ben Johnson, but also a move that gives us, as it were, unactively long versions of the plays.
And it's been argued that this isn't... Unactively.
Yeah, exactly.
So that in a funny way, I think the Shakespeare case has been reopened lately.
that we're used to saying he wasn't interested in whether they would be preserved on a page.
Well, we don't really know very much about.
Hamlet's advice to the players is always cut, for instance.
Yes, that's right.
You never see a full... If you say, let's do Hamlet in full, what do you mean?
You mean everything from both?
So to take it back, I mean, I argue in the book, I think song is a mixed media art.
It's music and voice and words.
I think that one is allowed to attend to the words, provided one does not forget that it is only part of the art, but then the same is true of Shakespeare.
When A.C.
Bradley writes about Shakespeare, he is writing as if Shakespeare, for the purposes of Bradley's noticings, exists on the page.
So I suppose the question that keeps coming back for me is whether my way of getting at it
very severely limits what I can show, which I think it does, or whether it vitiates what I'm doing, so that the people who are, as it were, hostile to the whole enterprise say, I'm sorry, the whole enterprise is vitiated by your attending to the words only.
I think it's not vitiated by that, I think it is limited by that.
But when you're in the vicinity of somebody who is really good, I mean, if you're in the vicinity of genius, whatever you do is limited.
When you talk about, you suggest, and it has been documented clearly from his work, that Dylan is very well-read.
Would you like to know what his reading habits are?
I mean, or do you know?
Is this something you define from a close reading of the text?
Well, one of the key texts for this is Tarantula.
That is, Tarantula is a very mixed bag, as a book-become-novel.
The bits of it that are very good are the mocking letters, which come at regular intervals.
And a lot of them mock education.
A lot of them have learned jokes.
A lot of them have allusive jokes.
I mean, jokes about Walter Scott and about Jane Eyre and about Shakespeare and about Eliot.
April or so is a cruel month.
It's a good thing to do with Eliot because it messes up his rhythm in just the same way in which he liked messing up people's rhythm, for instance, Goldsmiths.
And because it raises an interesting question about why can you say noon or so, but you can't say April or so?
I mean, they're both units of time.
Why can't you say April or so?
So that, I mean, there's a sort of wit at work.
So Tarantula is a terrifically allusive book.
It is full of very funny literary jokes, all the way through, jokes about E.E.
Cummings.
And, of course, Dillon has given interviews in which he does talk about his reading.
There was a very good recent interview in the L.A.
Times.
in which he talked about, he said that he read the poets.
When he was young, he read the poets in the way in which people now read Stephen King.
And he explicitly said John Donne.
Now, I've been jeered at for mentioning John Donne.
It's rather nice to have Dylan mentioning John Donne.
So that world is a world which, I mean, it often suited that world to mockingly go a bit down market.
On the other hand, Dylan is a singer who's talking about love troubles, sings that might have been like Verlaine or Rambeau.
Now, you can say there's no reason to suppose he knows anything about Verlaine.
Who do you think you are, as it were, to suppose that he knows nothing about Verlaine and Rambeau?
It's a wonderful rhyme of Rambeau with, you're going to make me lonesome when you go.
When you go to France, I mean, Verlaine of Rambeau, I mean, but, I mean, he, there's a lot about, there's a lot of jokes about poetry and writing, you know, read all of F. Scott Fitzgerald's books.
Why should we think he, why should we think he holds the song Day of the Locusts and doesn't have any idea that there was a Nathaniel West book that had that in the plural instead of in the singular?
So, so you've been, apparently,
interested in Dylan for close to 40 years.
1965 was the year I read when you were out at Berkeley.
Yeah, that's right.
And I was insufficient.
And then I'm contrite about having been snobbish.
I mean, the English are not more snobbish than Americans, but we're differently snobbish.
And I think it was stupid to me in 65 to suppose that people who told me Dylan was good were sort of slumming.
Well, at what point did you think that you were encountering genius?
By 68, I knew what I was.
Really?
Yeah.
It's just, I mean, I've talked about this in some, the good questions that you ask are questions that have been put to me, as it were.
But I think the moment when you know that something is really good is when there's this double process of gratitude.
You're grateful to the song because it illuminates something about, say, a person you're in love with.
And then you're very grateful to the person you're in love with, because it really illuminates the song.
So there's this lovely, what I think of not a vicious circle, but a beautifully virtuous circle, by which you, as I do with Robert Graves' poems.
Dylan is set in one of the biographies to have met Robert Graves, and not actually to have sort of really hit it off with him.
But Graves' poems have that very beautiful applicability.
You read a Graves' love poem, and you think,
very strange that he sort of knew this about me, really.
I never met him.
Yeah, to go back to the Shakespeare parallel, I mean, one of the things that really dazzles people about us regarding Shakespeare is that he never attended university.
Of course, that's one of the arguments that these people try to give, that he couldn't be Shakespeare.
How did anyone so well-read have not attended university?
And, of course, Dylan is a
There's a dropout, too, and it just continues to dazzle that people could be so well-read, and not only so well-read, but to understand, even more than to assimilate this material into a proper way.
I think the story in the past is... I think you bring up an important point there at a slightly different angle, that is that
Our supposing that higher education has a monopoly of serious education would have seemed to people in the past to be very, very strange.
And it's still the case, as you know, that far fewer people, proportionately, go to a university in England than in the States, but that doesn't mean that they have left school, left their schooling, less well educated.
There are complications, aren't there, about how... I mean, I was the first member of my family to go to a university,
But my father was well-read.
So there were always books around?
There were books around.
The lending libraries were wonderful.
The Workers' Educational Association, which wasn't just for workers, it was really for the bourgeoisie, mostly, was very good.
The BBC, in the great days of the BBC, took literature and culture really seriously.
I mean, I remember hearing when I was 20...
This serious talk on Shakespeare's sonnets on the radio, and that's fifty years ago.
You're going to hear a serious twenty-five minute talk about Shakespeare's sonnets now.
So there were things that stood in the place of what we now think is provided only by university education.
The Eliot remark about Shakespeare being the sort of person who could absorb more in, as it were, a mourning,
than the simply scholarly mind can do.
I mean, how can Shakespeare have that time for North's Blutarch?
He didn't have that much time for North's Blutarch, but he just went right in on the speech about the barge.
He goes right in on certain moments with this extraordinarily absorbing power.
I said once that Dylan was like some wonderful sponge, and then I was told,
There's a cartoon character, something called SpongeBob.
This was very tactless of me.
I didn't know about it.
But there is this extraordinary ability to just get what you need, a terrific sense of what fosters your own insight into life and so on.
And that's not... Dr. Johnson talked about ripping the heart out of a book.
There's a certain kind of person who either reads the whole of a book or can't get anything from the book.
There's a different propensity, which is just to go in really extraordinary and just find the pen.
Alberto Eco told me that's exactly how he has 30,000 books in his home, and he said, you know, there are books that I can tell you I haven't read, but yet in the process of picking it up and looking through it and touching it, we all know it's in the book, and certainly you've
gotten things from it.
You can read a book without actually reading it.
It's a bad idea when reviewers do that.
I had a review which said, why the seven daily sins?
Why not something about faith, hope and charity?
Actually, there are more than 100 pages of our Facebook page.
Could you look at the contents page if you're reviewing this book?
Please don't read it, but you might look at it.
I guess what I was driving at, and if it seems like I'm not questioning you about Facebook, because that totally speaks for itself.
Well, you do what you like.
Please, of course.
But I guess what I was driving at with the Shakespeare question is that we are so puzzled by him as an individual, because we know so little about his biography.
And I wonder, are there things that puzzle you about Dylan?
Yeah, I mean, I think... And I guess his biography as well as his art.
Yeah.
Well, I think remaining... What do I want to think here?
I think artists are this extraordinary combination of being deeply private with going public.
I mean, the artist is somebody who goes public with the most intensely private things.
I think you can only do that if you do hold to certain intense privacies and reticences
That is then different in an age of celebrity.
I mean, Henry James foresaw everything that would happen to somebody like Dylan.
I mean, his description of the great actress in The Tragic Muse is a description of the price that she will pay for being a celebrity and hope that she will be able to travel around the world and continue to act without being a travesty of herself.
That's a whole world of celebrity.
Now, I take it, I mean, I've got my 15 minutes not quite of fame, but of kind of being interviewed.
I take it that the celebrity is like a cuttlefish and announces where it is in order to not be caught.
So what you get is, Dylan's decision has been the opposite of Beckett's.
Beckett is, don't give any interviews, and as he wonderfully said to somebody, no, not even for you.
In any case, I have no views to inter.
The idea that really an interview is living death, because it just inters your views.
Dylan has done the opposite thing, which is terrific self-exposure, like Norman Mailer, and at the same time remaining extraordinarily unknown and mysterious.
He might have really exposed himself, but how much has he revealed?
Exactly.
You expose yourself in order not to reveal yourself.
And I think many of the things he says about this in interviews are rather touching.
I have a very beautiful photograph at home taken by Carly, Simon's brother, Peter, and it's of Dylan from the back at the piano, and you look at him, and that's all dark, and you look out into a sunlit amphitheatre of gigantic size and so on.
And Dylan is terrifically alone in this photo.
So I don't know.
I mean, it's clear that he fabricated a whole lot of stories about himself when young, rather as Andre Malraux did and as Henry Miller did.
There's a whole world of Nin, all these people.
You look into it and the discrepancies between the official accounts of what they were and were doing.
So it's clearly early Dylan is doing a lot of covering his tracks.
Does he have a sense, do you think, of...
who he is, I mean, in terms of his place as a poet?
I don't know.
I mean, I think he's talked well in interviews about the dangers of self-consciousness.
I mean, that is, in a way, about, how do I want to put this, even about the dangers of self-knowledge.
I mean, we tend to say, know thyself, and that this is an aspiration.
But,
it's difficult to know things without becoming knowing about them.
That is, just as we want people to be self-conscious, but not self-conscious, so we want people to know themselves, but not to suppose that they're knowable.
I mean, I think, one of the things I hate in Rousseau is that he thinks he knows himself.
I mean, he begins by saying that he really knows himself.
I don't think he did know himself, but one of the things he didn't know was how unknowable you are, even to yourself, or especially to yourself.
I mean, Proust is wonderful, isn't he,
How?
Who's the person you really want to deceive all the time?
You.
So that I think there's a certain kind of knowledge and self-understanding that Dylan would think comes between you and felicity, something that happens
by a kind of chance.
Remember, Dr. Johnson loves that term, felicity.
A good effect in poetry is a felicity.
It's something which falls out happily, which you couldn't will into existence, and which wasn't even the consequence of your own knowing something.
Knowing that you would receive grace, I mean, I'm an atheist, but knowing that you would receive grace would, I think, be incompatible with receiving it.
And the point about grace is you can't know.
You better be prepared, if it arrives, to recognize it for what it is.
But
Keith writes beautifully about this, that it's as if his best things had been written by somebody else.
He can't believe that he wrote it.
And he says, I cannot conceive how I came upon it.
You know, I did an interview with John Keegan.
Oh, yes.
And, of course, I asked him, and we all know The Face of Battle, of course, is this great book, and that's the one that he... And he said, that one I wrote, he said, I don't remember writing any of it.
It's like I was in a zone.
You know, just getting up and not realizing where it's coming from.
That's right.
It's kind of getting at that level, I guess, where there's just so much just... I think it's kind of what you're talking about.
I think that's right.
I mean, Keegan and I were at college together, I find an interesting thing, and I was very interested in his combination of, in a way, a military career with a not-military career.
There used to be a military historian.
and the relation of that to the physical challenge that he faced, which is very, very considerable, so that there's a kind of courage in him which could not be directly translated into battlefield courage, but life's a battlefield.
Of course, he's invaluable to the whole military apparatus.
Yeah, absolutely.
But the feeling that inspiration has something to do with not knowing,
We remember Blake, though they are not mine, I call them mine.
Now, what do you mean, though they're not mine?
Well, because you don't really know what goes to the making of them.
I mean, Dylan, the three concerts that he gave recently in Boston, he ended every night with All Along the Watchtower.
He came back to the first verse of it.
So as you went out into the night, you heard him singing, not with complacency at all, none of them along the line know what any of it is worth.
And that's also remarkable about himself.
I mean, if you say, do you know what it is worth?
The answer is, you have to say, no, I don't know what it is worth.
My songs lead their own lives.
And to know what your song is worth would be to deny them.
this right to live their own lives.
They're beautiful, I think.
I asked Helen Vendler a couple weeks ago, how in her view does something become canonical?
And she said other writers.
And I wonder if you'd agree with that.
Well, I'd agree and disagree with it.
I think that the pound is right to say that the greatest form of criticism is always subsequent creation.
That's not, I think, true of the performing arts, because the greatest form of criticism of a performing art is a performance, so that it will forever be different.
I mean, the rich criticism of a Shakespeare play is a production of it.
even what Zola and Balzac and Dickens do with Shakespeare is not in the end as crucial as criticism as a production of it, because it was through productions, etc.
So I think Pound's right about that.
I think the bit where I disagree perhaps with Helen, though perhaps not with you, is the word canonical, in that it seems to me what that word immediately does is locate importance in the university.
Now, the university is now the most powerful patron that literature has.
It's not good for the university, though, to be told or to come to believe that being the most important patron is the most important thing.
That is canonical.
I mean, nobody ever wondering whether to read a book says, is it in the canon?
No decent human being ever thinks like that.
The canon really means the syllabus.
The canon really means it.
When people say, is it in the canon, they mean, is it taught?
Does the MLA authorize the teaching of it?
On the other hand, when you hear that a university like Brown, a very distinguished university, or Amherst College, for English majors does not require the study of Shakespeare.
One hopes that they would
Well, I'm terrifically in favour of syllabi.
Well, I'm terrifically in favour of having a syllabus, and one of the reasons I wasn't happy in Cambridge was that there was no syllabus, essentially.
What that does is either mean that there's no... Well, because there is no common body of books that your students have all read,
you have to study something which doesn't depend upon any particular book, such as narratology.
That is, all novels are in some way in touch with narratology, so it doesn't make any difference whether you, Stephanie, have read Dickens, and Harriet has read Henry James, because narratology... So one of the reasons why theory arrived, or conquered for a while, partly because there was a war as to what books to study,
And if you can't agree on what books to study, what you agree on is a form of study which doesn't depend on what particular books are.
So that's why you can go to a higher, to a meta-matter.
It still amazes me that a person can conceivably get a degree.
I'm an English major, and not to demonstrate proficiency in Shakespeare.
Well, I agree.
I mean, I agree.
I was, I mean...
I was brought up with, of course, you had the first choice of Shakespeare, a choice of paper Shakespeare reference.
Excuse me for going on up into this.
No, no, no, it's important.
But I think that's different from, I mean, art stays alive because of artists and the general public.
The most important patron is the university.
The university, therefore, has a way of saying art stays alive because of universities.
Now, hang on, but it doesn't.
Literature did not stay alive because of the church, though it would have died without the church.
It didn't stay alive because of political regimes or because of privileged classes, though it would have died without patronage.
The university, like all patrons, is blind in certain respects and generous in others, and certainly too proprietorial.
So that people, you know, when Cynthia Ozick says that some years ago that, you know, that T.S.
Eliot doesn't matter any longer, I mean, he isn't really taught anywhere.
A, it's not true that he isn't taught anywhere.
B, whether he's taught or not is not the only way in which people stay alive.
And Geoffrey Hill's poems are alive with and against T.S.
Eliot.
It is true that there wouldn't be a book buying public if it went for University Patronage now.
But publishers are kept solvent
by the book trade at two universities.
And I don't mean that nobody ever reads a book once they've left the university, but if you didn't... So this is where the patron is, and in the past it's been elsewhere.
Now, I'm a charter member of the Association of Literary Critics and Scholars.
Yeah, good.
Yeah, look, ALSC conferences, right there.
And very proudly so.
And of course, I'm a journalist and not really a literary scholar at this, but nevertheless, I think it... Because I write for newspapers and magazines, and I write books about books.
It's very important to...
express where your allegiance is.
And a lot of this did emerge from a conflict with the MLA, and where you really don't have a canon at all.
Well, you see, the funny thing there is, I think,
Because of the word canon... And the dead white European males, that whole... Yeah, I'm wondering to agree with you, but then importantly not to, too, because I think the trouble with using the word canon is that it sells the past.
It's funny, the word syllabus was an honourable word because it was frankly pedagogical.
The word canon is a dishonourable word because it comes over from sacred text,
it, I think, attributes to a whole lot of texts which are sacred in my eyes, but are not sacred texts, a certain power, and it's a little bit like, I mean, people like you and me should not use the word ideology, and it's not that we disagree exactly that ideology's at work, it's just that somebody's faith is not the same as an ideology, and it isn't true that, I mean, when people talk about kind of, you know, Pascal's ideology, you want to say, see, Pascal had a faith,
There's a creed that he credited.
You can describe it as an ideology, and you wouldn't be wrong to see it under the aspect of politics, but to call it ideology is to say the most important aspect under which to see it is political.
If you call it a creed or a faith, you say the most important aspect under which to see it is religious.
If you call it a canon, you say the most important context under which to see it is the university.
Because my brother, who loves poems, is moved to tears by poems,
Donald would never in a million years wonder whether to buy a book and ask anybody whether it was in the canon.
He's going to say, are these poems really as moving as I've been told?
But I totally appreciate that.
But on the other hand, you see something like the Library of America, which is an attempt over the last 20 odd years to establish the American literary canon.
I guess the play art is the... Yeah, but what were they doing?
A hundred years ago, they didn't say canon.
So you're not going to say that 100 years ago they didn't, you're not going to say Henry James didn't want to establish.
Some of these books fell out of print, too.
I mean, part of the effort was to bring them back.
No, that's all true.
And the word, hang on to put this, I feel about canons I do about liberty.
You know, what crimes are committed in its name?
I think liberty is a very good idea.
I'm in favor of it.
As soon as they start saying liberty, it's a little bit like Dylan, you know, rip down all hate, I screamed.
Sorry, as he knows, if you scream it, you're not ripping down hate.
You either say rip down all hate and acknowledge that you're in favour of screaming, or you say, we really must stop hating.
But you say it, you don't scream.
So it's funny how I think certain words really grant the terms to the other side.
I mean, I think Helen Wendt was right to say, what matters most is what artists make of previous art.
That's how art most stays alive.
It's almost precisely the phrase that she used in that.
But, but, but... Do you know how Cameron, for me, cuts across that?
Because I think it cuts you off from the readerly instincts of the people who, in the end... Do you mind if I shoot a couple pictures, by the way?
No, I don't mind.
I don't like it, but I don't mind.
Well, too soon, I mean.
Go ahead, please.
I'm married to a photographer and therefore don't mind being photographed.
And you'll notice the calculated abstention from a photograph.
And you know Splendor of Letters has no pictures in it.
Because I figured a book that celebrates letters... Yeah, it doesn't need pictures.
Well, that's very good.
I like that.
Thank you.
I haven't noticed yet, but I'll... Don't mind.
I'm just saying why you're talking.
Please, shoot away.
Sorry.
But maybe we'll take a few more before I go to the books.
And my wife, who's quite a good critic and editor, we work together with the pictures, anything that we use.
Oh, yes.
Not to worry.
I now know, of course, about your writing, and I'm grateful for that, and grateful that you put me on to the TLS, which I might otherwise have missed.
You speak of yourself modestly as a journalist, as it were.
But where do you mostly appeal?
I have a little syndicate of my own.
circulates to about a dozen newspapers.
At one point, I was about 30 or so at the Philadelphia Inquirer.
And you've built this up over the years.
I had built it up, and I had been a literary editor in Worcester, Massachusetts for 13 years, and then I became syndicated.
At my height, I had 30 or so pieces.
And now I do, well, I mean, because you lose them, and then it became so hard.
And the world changes, too.
And I was doing a weekly piece, and I wasn't able to write my books.
And a week is a lot.
It is.
Every week you do one and then you go out.
But I've been doing a lot of reviews for the L.A.
Times lately, and it's been kind of fun.
And that's been satisfying me, and magazine beats.
But I really have been focusing on my books.
Three books in three years.
That's very good, isn't it?
You must be very pleased.
I am.
I'm a late bloomer.
I had published my first book when I was 52 years old.
Oh, really?
Gosh, that is unusual.
George Eliot was pretty old.
That makes sense.
You know, this is kind of a softball question, but it's important.
And I really add that the tentative title of my new book is Every Book It's Reader, which is a... You don't have to reach millions of people for a book to be influential and to be important.
And I guess I really would like a statement or some thoughts about the continuing power of poetry to shape our lives.
I mean, so many people would suggest that poetry, some people, I mean, the Philistines, to be sure, perhaps, but...
That poetry doesn't matter, and I wonder if you could give me a general comment on that, and also how it shapes and continues to nourish your own life.
There isn't, for me, a poetry-prose distinction along these lines.
I know that for some people there is.
I mean, that is, I think Helen, one of the disagreements I would have with Helen Wendler is that I think she believes all literature would be poetry if it could.
I think that she's strangely... I know John Updike would probably be a poet if he would.
It's published poetry, but if you ask him what the highest calling is, it would be the poet, as opposed to the novelist.
And that particular sort of indoctrination or prejudice has kind of operated on a lot.
I mean, that is an awful lot of writers who, I think even perhaps Beckett.
I mean, Beckett started wanting to be a poet.
I mean, he came, I think he's a much better poet at the end of his life than at the beginning of his life.
Beckett's greatest works are not for me.
poems.
I mean, and I don't really then want to cheat with it by saying, but essentially that's because his prose is itself poetry.
I mean, I just want to hold the differences of punctuation.
His immense resourcefulness was not released, I think, except occasionally in poems, and it was in the prose.
And that's something of a difference, because that prejudice, you know, I mean, Coleridge saying, you know, the words in the best order, poetry is the best words in the best order.
Well, come on.
Jane Austen was not working in an inferior medium.
I mean, a medium isn't inferior to Keats' medium or Byron.
It's the same, the medium is the same language and so on.
The sort of conversations I get into with people now would have to do with asking them where they think their consciousness and their conscience come from
if it isn't in large part from works of art.
That is, when people say, wouldn't it be better if, and this is a traditional point about the church, if we sold all that we had and gave to the poor, instead of any money being spent by Boston University on its library, wouldn't it make for a much better world if we didn't spend money on books, we spent money on relieving people, you know, I mean, importantly in soup kitchens and so on.
And the question that I then put is, but where do you think caring for poverty-stricken and anguished people comes from?
I don't believe it's built into human beings to care.
It's built into me to hate caring as an adjective.
We're trying to create a deeply caring institution.
There's something awful about that.
But I think that caring, it's not just natural to human beings to care and to be magnanimous and to be compassionate.
So where do these things come from?
Well, they come either from people whom you love or from works of art that you love.
I think Shaw is right.
The next to personal conduct, the most powerfully influential thing, is art.
It falls short of personal conduct in some respects as an influencer, and in other respects it goes ahead of personal conduct, partly because you can be influenced by those persons who are no longer around.
I mean, the terrible thing about dead white European males was the opprobrium attached to the word dead.
I mean, the white European male bit, I mean, it's not clear to me why being cloven instead of clustered necessarily makes you more dishonorable.
That's the adjective that Tennyson's aunt used.
It's really good, I think.
She said she had never regretted being born cloven and not clustered.
It's a beautiful way of setting up gender differences and so on.
But dead, I mean, as if, you know, the wonderful thing is to be in conversation with people who are dead
It has many of the advantages of conversation, and it's free of many of the disadvantages of conversation.
It's got a wonderful disinterestedness.
So that, I mean, for me, it would turn... And you do find yourself often in conversation, to use your... Well, yeah, I think so.
I mean, one of the things that pleased me about the review in the New York Times Book Review of the book was that it said that I put the poems together and was interested in the way in which they spoke to one another.
as it might be a done poem talking to a Dylan song, set them up so that they're sort of in conversation, which is different from saying this one is alluded to.
That is, there is a kind of conversation, you know, if somebody says, come, madam, come, all rest my powers defy, until I labour, I in labour lie, there's a relation between that and lay, lay, lay.
Come, madam, come, returns.
It doesn't matter to me whether Dylan knows Dunn, though I'm interested to read his talking, when he talks about Dunn, I'm sort of pleased about it.
But the belief that an analogue is not as interesting as a source,
or a belief that a source is interesting only if it's an allusion.
I mean, I love allusions, and I've written a book about allusion, but a source can be very interesting without being alluded to, and an analogue can be wonderfully interesting without being a source.
That these two myths of the Flood exist in quite different cultures with so many features in common.
So, I mean, that's all I haven't done.
Well, tell me what I should say.
You know, you were credited with being the midwife to the careers of Seamus Heaney, Philip,
Larkin, I wonder if maybe you could talk a little bit about the role of the critic.
Well, that was kind of somebody but was overstated.
I think it was people wanting me to get elected to the poetry professorship.
I'm very pleased to have reviewed Seamus Heaney's first book very favorably and to have reviewed his second book very favorably and in general to have continued to believe in his worth.
I'm very pleased to have written probably the first essay that was written on Geoffrey Hill, not the first review of any of his books,
But the first essay about him, which was in the London magazine a long, long time ago, I'm pleased to have written about Beckett when I was an undergraduate at Oxford in the mid-fifties.
And that's not so early from Beckett's point of view, but it's pretty early from the world's point of view.
I mean, you say pleased in terms also of recognizing the work and sharing his perception.
Yeah, there was a nice feeling.
And the thing I've done lately that has most pleased me in this way is this
Victorian Irish poet, James Henry, whom I started reading only because I was tickled by his not being Henry James.
So I took down this book in the Cambridge University Library.
I was editing the new Oxford Book of Victorian Verse.
I saw James Henry, took it down, published at his own expense in Dresden in the 1860s, presented by him to Cambridge University Library in England with the pages never cut, never opened.
And this was to be so poignant.
I think of this Victorian doctor sending his poems from Dresden.
This is a wonderful story.
And so I did this book of his poems.
Every book it's reader, you see.
Here's a book that was lying untouched.
Unopened.
And you happened upon it because of the... And he never had a season review.
And he was never reviewed by anybody.
He gets into the DNB as a Virgilian scholar.
So it's not that James Henry was totally unknown.
But he was in no anthology.
Whatever the scale, he was in no anthology.
And he's now in quite a lot of anthologies, because I brought out this edition of him.
And there's something about thinking, and he's a lovely poet.
I mean, you love the poems.
I mean, they're very wonderful openings.
One begins, By what mistake were pigeons made so happy?
It's a wonderful, extraordinary view of the world.
I mean, he's an anti-Christian poet.
I mean, he's very devout in his human pieties.
He thinks that paganism is wrong but isn't as bad as Christianity, at any rate.
But by what mistake would he do?
He's a lovely poet.
So there's some sort of pleasure in having recognised something.
Midwife is, though, terrifically overdoes it.
And Larkin I wrote very favorably about early, but I'm nothing like the first generation of people.
So how do you decide who you will read?
And I mean read, of course, not only to enjoy, but to write about and to share your perceptions with.
How does this particular alchemy change?
Well, I think it's mostly luck.
I mean, I go back to the idea of felicity.
Something happens which is a happy happenstance.
That is, in the case of... I mean, there's a felicity about just... How do you want to put it?
If I'd been living in Oxford, as I did for ten years, instead of in Cambridge, as I did for ten years, when working on this anthology, I would never have read James Henry, because I would never have had stack access to the Bodleian.
So this depended on... Now, in general, I'm against stack access.
I mean, I think that... Well, yeah, I think Cambridge University Library loses a lot of books, and it doesn't know what it has.
And there are all kinds of ways in which you lose something if you permit stack access.
How many joyful discoveries have I made in the Widener library?
No, there was a lovely thing that happened.
That's right, we need them both.
We need great libraries that have stack access, and we need great libraries that don't.
I mean, for instance, one of the virtues of not having stack access is that you have servants who bring you the book.
Now, that is an amazing saving.
I mean, I simply write a slip, and that book will be in the upper reading room, the Bodleian Library.
But you know what you're looking for.
Yes, well, the price of... The serendipity factor is now gone.
Yes, that's right.
Well, I don't know whether all the princes of Serendip did well.
I certainly don't think Salon has done terribly well as a country, if we're really going to get back to Serendip.
But I think there is just a terrific lot of luck.
Why do I...
I happened to be in Paris on holiday at a time when Beckett had just published Watt in 1953.
So I happened to pick up in the Paris bookshop in the Rue des Seines a numbered copy of Watt, which I bought for 25 shillings, because I read the first page and I thought, this is really weird and funny, and I will be the only person in the world who will have read it.
A little empty brine.
Now, but it's a pure fluke.
I mean, I could easily not have been under the Rue de Seine.
But these are the discoveries, and then, not to use the word canonical, but then there is the pantheon, certainly, of people who are at the core.
Yeah.
Well, trusting... And you must return to them often.
You can recite them at will.
Well, I can't really recite them at will.
But, well, I think there are
I don't know if it would be the same for you.
There are people whom one trusts.
I agree with Dylan that if you want somebody you can trust yourself, but I trust Eliot's taste.
I think Eliot had extraordinarily good taste.
Connoisseurship can easily become snobbish and wine tasting and a whole lot of prissy things, but in the end we're indebted to connoisseurs.
I mean, Berenson had better eyes than I have.
He was better trained to look at paintings.
That's a word we don't use anymore, connoisseur.
No, well, it's thought to be elitist.
But it keeps a connoisseur.
He didn't regard himself as a connoisseur.
I'm sorry.
No, no, that's right.
And the connoisseur is the person who knows things, including knowing about.
He recognizes and knows.
It has an elitist tinge to it, unfortunately.
Well, there is.
The reason what one ought to do, I think,
in arguing with people about that is not so much... I sometimes find it useful to remind people that in the areas that they really care about, they're absolutely used to the idea that this particular manager of this particular sports team had something which, if he were moving it somewhere else, you'd call commissorship.
This person has
really trained instincts and wisdom and knowledge all coming perfectly together in picking the Indian team or in deciding at what point you declare and so on, all those things.
The general elitist competitiveness thing doesn't work at all in sports.
Everybody knows that sports are elitist and rightly.
You're looking for
You're looking for an absolutely crack team.
Why is it all right to have a crack team if they're playing basketball, but to think that the idea of a crack team in an English department... I think Lord David Cecil was right.
I mean, I didn't like his aristocratic manner when I was at Oxford and young and so on, but he was right to say, poets are not racehorses, they do not run the one against the other.
But on the other hand, Leavis was also right to think that you are trying to establish what the really great life-enduring things are, and that a lot of other things are footling.
They're a waste of time, and it's not that you should read Henry James all the time, but you better be aware that not to read What Maisie Knew is to miss some extraordinary apprehensions about what divorce is and what children are,
that you won't get from any number of sort of Kramer versus Kramer films.
You know, you talk about Henry James, and he really is one of the great examples.
When you talk about collecting and bibliophiles and following the flag, he really is a writer who straddles both.
Yes, yeah, yeah, yeah.
The English tradition, and of course, he's a great, he's arguably one of the two or three great American novels.
Yeah, I agree.
And has so much
Well, let's do this question first, because you said you're the first one in your family to graduate from university.
Yeah.
And you said there were books in the home, but can you describe for me what happened?
I mean, what absolutely happened in your life that you became so... I hesitate to use the word obsessed.
Well, I... With poetry and...
I was at a boarding school from 8 to 18.
The first chapter of Jane Eyre, in which somebody tries to protect herself by reading a book, I think it's the greatest first chapter of any novel I've ever read.
I think it's an absolutely perfect opening chapter.
I think it is so touching, it's so full of understanding of parental, and especially sort of foster-parental, and
difficulties, sibling rivalries, and so on.
And she wanted to tuck herself in behind the curtains on the window seat and read.
And she's not going to be allowed to.
And the book is thrown at her as a weapon.
Good books are weapons.
Samuel Johnson knocked a guy.
Is it Lauder?
I'm trying to remember.
He was supposed to be doing a translation and he went up and he said live air and he stood on his neck.
It was wonderful.
Well, at my boarding school there was not an immense number.
So I was there from eight to eighteen.
There were protections against the harsher side of school life.
One of them was I had a brother who was four years older.
And it wouldn't be true that he stopped me being bullied, but he stopped me being bullied to nightmare, proportionally.
I had a brother who protected me in the same manner.
Forever and dead, too.
Yeah, well, same here.
Though it wasn't a sufficient protection, but it was better.
So there was that.
But mostly, I think, like a lot of people, I protected myself by having somewhere to go other than the sports field or other than the...
changing room and so on, so that I liked studying, and I felt the relief and release that you get from reading.
So that was very nice.
I had two very good English teachers who, by a great bit of luck, profoundly disagreed about quite a lot of things.
Mr. Swan and Mr. Harrison.
Remember their first names?
Ted Swan.
S-W-A-N?
S-W-A-N, just one N.
I think I got to know Ted Swan after I left school, so he became Ted for me.
Mr. Harrison was always just Mr. Harrison, and I don't know his first name.
He's living in Australia now.
I mentioned him in an article in the Sunday Times a few years ago, and somebody wrote to me saying,
Mr. Harrison lives in Australia.
He heard about this.
He's really pleased that you're still, after 60 years, remember him.
So there is a venturing element here then, isn't it?
Yeah, well, the lucky thing here, yeah, I was very lucky with these two teeth.
I was lucky that the school library wasn't bad at all.
I was lucky that my mother gave me a subscription to the Times Literary Supplement when I was really quite young.
It had a kind of snobbish, risky side, because at my school people were mostly reading Superman comics, not reading The Times Literary Supplement.
So that as so often there's a relation between self-respect of a not-good kind that has to do with snobbery.
I was a cut above these Berkshire Ploughboys.
I was reading The Times Literary Supplement.
And there's a bad side to that, but on the other hand we need to find our armour where we can, and that was one place.
or you find it in some sense of superiority, not necessarily well-founded, but it stops you bursting into tears all the time.
Then I was two years in the army, and again, for similar reasons, books were very important to me then.
Well, my schoolmasters disagreed, and that was a terrific bit of luck.
But don't forget the armies.
I'd really like to hear about that.
No, no, you've got a question.
Well, the thing with the teachers was that one of them had been brought up in Cambridge and thought with Levis that Milton, there was something terribly perverse about Milton's writing, that Milton was not a great poet because of the intrinsic perversity of his dealings with English.
He written no language, and so on.
Sort of Johnsonian and Levisite.
The other teacher, Mr. Harrison, was taught much more simply in a different tradition.
And it was very good to me to have teachers where it was clear that you could honorably disagree with somebody else and argue without believing you could prove.
You could argue without quarrelling.
That's a really important thing.
Intellectuals too much suppose that you can argue without quarrelling.
Non-intellectuals too much suppose that you can't argue without quarrelling.
It's a major difference between intellectuals and non-intellectuals.
They're both in danger.
The assumption that you can argue and not end up in a quarrel is often misplaced.
The belief that you can never argue without any other quarrel is equally misplaced.
So I would feel that in my own family.
My father and mother and grandmothers, I didn't know my grandfathers, they were intelligent non-intellectuals.
Dad loved Ike Claudius.
Ike Claudius was absolutely at the limit of the kind of book that Dad would read.
He would never read anything that aspired beyond... And it's a very good book.
He would never read poems that aspired beyond John Maysfield, who wrote some very good poems.
But my older brother, who's an attorney, for him it's Frederick Forsyth, so I... Well, that's right.
And perhaps, you see, maybe 50 years ago that would have... Maybe that would have been... If you go back to my father's generation,
It may be that there weren't quite the Forsythes.
You know, you had James Branch Cabell instead of... I mean, he was there.
You mentioned how important books were to you and the army.
Yeah, well, that again had a... There was a feeling of a need not to... It wasn't quite ivory tower or escape, but it was some relief and release from the ordinary day, so that a book was very important.
I first saw...
Seven Types of Ambiguity when I was in the Army, though I wasn't the person who was reading it.
I was terrifically impressed by the fact that somebody in the training, officer's training program that I was in, had this book called Seven Types of Ambiguity.
It was terribly risky, because the barrack room
people don't want you reading books.
Especially ambiguity.
Exactly.
I'm a fallen naval officer myself, so I understand the... But the army officers, I mean, I was in a, of course, it was two years conscription.
I had the luck that I was in a second battalion.
That is, that the Green Howards had been very successful in recruiting and had a second battalion.
And that was very good in terms of the make-up of the regimental, you know, the regiment that I was in.
We were sent to Egypt before Suez.
So I was in Egypt in 52, I'm trying to think.
Yeah, 52 to 3, something like that.
But so reading was very important.
I mean, you're sitting in some parched tent in Egypt.
I used to spend months on end at sea.
Yeah, it'd be a similar thing.
That's right.
Where would one?
So...
Then I had been very well advised to go in the army before going up to Oxford.
I applied to Oxford from my grammar school.
I was at this grammar school in Bali.
So did you have a commission prior to Oxford?
That's pretty good.
Yeah.
I was told not to do what some people did, which was to defer national service until after getting a degree.
I was told, and it was very good advice, go in the army.
Two bits of it.
One was go in the army now.
Secondly, go in the Army now, as against the Air Force, and go into an infantry regiment, not into the Education Corps or the Service Corps, any of those things.
If you're going to have to do two years, learn to be a soldier rather than learn to be an altogether effective teacher when you don't really want to do it.
So I had a commission in the Greenhouse, then went to Oxford, therefore, at, let me think, I went to Oxford at 20 instead of at 18.
Please, I'm aware.
And I've got to see somebody at four.
No, that's why I'm looking at my clock.
That's great.
Thank you.
Somebody's to come here at four, but we have a bit of time.
That was nice of you.
I didn't mean to be rude.
You weren't rude.
No, I'm glad that you didn't mean to be, because you weren't.
No, that was good of you.
Thank you.
No, it's considerate of you.
I sometimes wonder... Anyway, please.
We're...
This is really a ridiculous question.
I've asked so many people over the last 25 years, and I don't know if Shakespeare is one of the great heroes for you, undoubtedly he is, but if you had a chance to sit with Shakespeare, wave Prospero's magic wand, what one question, above all others, would you like to ask him?
How would you begin the conversation with him?
What puzzles?
I mean, I've asked that question.
Harold Bloom and Schornbaum.
Oh, really?
He said, well, I would want to get to the wellsprings of creativity.
He said it would interest me most.
Robert Giroux said, I'd like to know why he
He never saw fit to publish his place.
I mean, of course, it's a publisher.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I don't mean to put you on the spot, but... No, it's very interesting.
I wouldn't... I'd want to know about his reading, for instance.
That would be my only question.
Yeah, no, that's very good.
Because I think that suggests the wellspring of creativity in some ways, but... I tend... I mean, my habit of... Well, my habit of mind is to always think...
very much in terms of particular instances.
The critics that I know to be better than I am are the ones who are very good at a kind of middle tissue that I find very difficult.
The reason why I admire Empson as much as I do... I mean, he is my superior in every respect, and I think he was a genius.
But I don't mean I haven't done anything that I'm pleased with.
I have done things I'm pleased with.
But I think he was wonderful in...
local detail, he was wonderful in some large general context or arc, so that his realising that the rhyme of the ancient mariner is in an important respect about the slave trade is a very, very large, very, very large thought.
It's a surprising thought.
As soon as it's uttered, and as soon as you begin to substantiate it, it's clearly right that these are the years in which Coleridge is reading all about the slave trade, taking out all these books about the slave trade.
It's the slave trade, and so on.
And what is this guilt that hangs around maritime expansion, and so on.
And so there's a kind of sense that it makes.
And then Empson is also good in a kind of middle tissue.
Now, I've always found middle tissue, which would be a little bit like being, you might be
You might be somebody who's very good at details of character, very good at plot, but not very good at situation.
Situation's a kind of middle tissue in the novel, it seems to me, and every now and then you get a book which has a wonderful situation and is short on plot, or a wonderful plot but doesn't really have this sense of, you know, it's as if you bound from a very local observation about the tone in which a particular character said something to a large thought about injustice
without somehow getting this middle bit and so on.
Now, the bit that I'd try to get... So if I had a chance to talk, if I had a chance to put questions to Shakespeare, I think they'd be questions about... They'd go something like this.
Am I wrong to think that something goes wrong with this work of yours?
Because the thing that I...
The thing that I find myself most caring about is, as it were, how can it be that Eliot, whom I admire so much, let me see, I'm not going to agree with what I'm not going to say, but how can it be that Eliot, who is so deeply and profoundly sensitive to so much, writes in Gerontian an anti-Semitic poem, because anti-Semitism is insensitive.
It's terrific.
Now, I...
don't believe that Garantian is an anti-Semitic poem, but my friend John Gross is quite sure that it is, and quite sure that it's Eliot who says the juice quads on the windowsill again, whereas I think that it's Garantian who says that, and I've never met anybody who agrees with Garantian or who would like to be like Garantian.
But the starting point for me often has to do with some failure, either in a receiver or in a transmitter.
It's clearly that Eliot Gorontian is not getting through to John Gross, and is it Eliot's failure to transmit or John Gross's failure to receive?
So that for me, there's something terribly wrong with Measure for Measure.
We take it back to the Shakespeare case.
I think there's something profoundly wrong with Measure for Measure.
I would like to have it explained to me that I've got that wrong, because I think it's a very great play.
I mean, I say it perhaps too often.
I'm not a Christian.
It is very, it's not disturbing to me, it's immensely surprising to me to have a 45-year-old son who's a Christian.
It's really an amazement to me.
Fortunately, I... Well, I think that literature, I mean, the interesting thing is that literature gives you sympathetic access to citizens of belief that are not your own.
And the terrible thing that's happened lately is that literature is valued in proportion as it concurs with what you believe.
entertaining beliefs that you do not hold is an imperative individual and social training.
It's very difficult to train people to entertain beliefs.
It's much easier to get them to believe things than to get them to entertain beliefs.
Anyway, so part of this would be for measure for measure.
I'd like to know why is it all right for Angelo to have been and to be known to the Duke to have been a duplicitous, treacherous person?
What does it mean to say, hence we shall see if power change purpose, what our schemers be, if all along the very person who says that knows that Angelo defected on his engagement, his affianced Marianna, by pretending in her discoveries of dishonour because she no longer has a dowry.
Now, I don't believe that about Angelo.
I think the opening of the play is true,
And Aeschylus is right to say, if any in Vienna be of worth to undergo such ample praise and honor, it is Lord Angelo.
And the terrible thing that happens is that somebody who is, from one point of view, morally and spiritually all right, but only from one point of view, has this hidden...